---
layout: post
title: Just a postdoc
---

I'm in the process of changing positions. I've now finished 3 years of postdoctoral work at Stellenbosch University (1 year industry funded, 2 years funded through the Centre of Invasion Biology), and am moving back to Australia to take up a new postdoctoral position with CSIRO Agriculture. My new project looks fantastic, and will allow me to really challenge myself to learn and apply new types of analysis, building on my research interests in a new direction.

In the current climate of scientific research worldwide, I feel extremely privileged and proud to be awarded a new position. Securing funding is hard, securing positions are hard, and its a case of often having to relocate to match those requirements. This is something that is often discussed at length by those who find themselves trapped between career and life commitments, having to make large sacrifices one way or another. My own experience is largely the same, although there is another point that I feel is also important - the validity of being a postdoc. In the process of telling people that I'm leaving to take up a new position, I have been asked numerous times "is it a job, or another postdoc?". 

For some background, in South Africa a postdoc is funded through a bursary rather than a salary, you are not staff nor student, and if a foreigner, you enter the country on a study visa. This creates a kind of limbo about your position, as for all intents and purposes, you are treated as a student and are required to state you are, in fact, studying at your institution every time you enter the country (as a visa requirement). Overall, I think this leads to a generally dismissive view of postdocs by University staff (although Academic staff are somewhat more understanding), in the sense that you are regarded as a perpetual student, rather than someone independently performing research at a high level, fostering network connections for the University and assisting with the teaching, supervision and training of the students therein.

Additionally, South Africa is going through a period of transformation, and attempting to correct the imbalance in representation of different racial groups of people in academic positions. Certainly, this is something that needs to be addressed and is essential to the ongoing development of the nation's academic institutions, and to facilitate a range of benefits to the wider community. However, current measures to correct this see severely inexperienced people fast-tracked through to lectureships without having undergone an extremely important term of postdoctoral research. I think because of this South Africa currently has a system that presents attaining permanent faculty positions as soon as possible as the only goal one should have, and that postdoctoral research is a hindrance to this. This cheapens the perception of the postdoctoral researcher, by presenting them as alternative, and slower, track to gaining a fully tenured, or permanent, position.

A postdoc, to me, is an important time after your PhD to take on independent research and develop those basic skills you began in your postgraduate studies. Yes, it is still a time of learning and a time that you’ll make numerous mistakes (for instance, my postdoc has taught me that I was trying to lead too many things and could be unproductive because of this). But it is also a highly skilled position where you are employed to deliver your ideas and problem solving abilities, and it should never be seen as a time of extended postgraduate studies whilst you try and secure that “real job”. After completing a PhD and 3 years of postdoctoral work, I’m choosing to do another postdoctoral fellowship because its exactly where I feel my career should be, and it is certainly not "just another postdoc". A postdoc is a professional role, albeit one for an early career. A postdoc is a foundation on which to build experience as a scientist and best set yourself up for progression to long term positions. A postdoc is a essential component of training scientists at a professional level and dismissing it will only diminish the research outlook for a lab, university or country.





